tep 1 — Installing Jenkins

Pre-req: Install Java JDK 8 or later

The version of Jenkins included with the default Ubuntu packages is often behind the latest available version from the project itself. To ensure you have the latest fixes and features, use the project-maintained packages to install Jenkins.

First, add the repository key to the system:

wget -q -O - https://pkg.jenkins.io/debian-stable/jenkins.io.key | sudo apt-key add -
 
After the key is added the system will return with OK.

Next, let’s append the Debian package repository address to the server’s sources.list:

sudo sh -c 'echo deb http://pkg.jenkins.io/debian-stable binary/ > /etc/apt/sources.list.d/jenkins.list'
 
After both commands have been entered, we’ll run update so that apt will use the new repository.

sudo apt update
 
Finally, we’ll install Jenkins and its dependencies.

sudo apt install jenkins
 
Now that Jenkins and its dependencies are in place, we’ll start the Jenkins server.

Step 2 — Starting Jenkins
Let’s start Jenkins by using systemctl:

sudo systemctl start jenkins
Since systemctl doesn’t display status output, we’ll use the status command to verify that Jenkins started successfully:

sudo systemctl status jenkins
 
If everything went well, the beginning of the status output shows that the service is active and configured to start at boot:

Output
● jenkins.service - LSB: Start Jenkins at boot time
   Loaded: loaded (/etc/init.d/jenkins; generated)
   Active: active (exited) since Fri 2020-06-05 21:21:46 UTC; 45s ago
     Docs: man:systemd-sysv-generator(8)
    Tasks: 0 (limit: 1137)
   CGroup: /system.slice/jenkins.service
Now that Jenkins is up and running, let’s adjust our firewall rules so that we can reach it from a web browser to complete the initial setup.

Step 3 — Opening the Firewall
To set up a UFW firewall, visit Initial Server Setup with Ubuntu 20.04, Step 4- Setting up a Basic Firewall. By default, Jenkins runs on port 8080. We’ll open that port using ufw:

sudo ufw allow 8080
 
Note: If the firewall is inactive, the following commands will allow OpenSSH and enable the firewall:

sudo ufw allow OpenSSH
sudo ufw enable
 
Check ufw’s status to confirm the new rules:

sudo ufw status
 
You’ll notice that traffic is allowed to port 8080 from anywhere:

Output
Status: active

To                         Action      From
--                         ------      ----
OpenSSH                    ALLOW       Anywhere
8080                       ALLOW       Anywhere
OpenSSH (v6)               ALLOW       Anywhere (v6)
8080 (v6)                  ALLOW       Anywhere (v6)
With Jenkins installed and our firewall configured, we can complete the installation stage and dive into Jenkins setup.
